# Minimal individual based model



There are infinitely many invasion fitness functions with
different competition kernels that give the same adaptive dynamics.

> Madhok2020 describes the minimal competition kernel

## Minimal individual based model
Described from Ispolatov et al. 2016 (cf references).
Adaptive dynamics is written as
```math
    \dot{x}_i = ((\nabla_y \alpha)(x,x))_i + ((\nabla_x \ln(K))(x))_i = w_i(x) + u_i(x)
```
It is assumed a standard carying capacity of the form
```math
    K(x) = \exp(-\|x\|^4/4).
```
**The minimal competition kernel** is defined as
```math
\alpha(x,y) = \exp\left(\sum_i w_i(x)(x_i-y_i) \right)
```
## Gaussian competition kernel and adaptive diversification

Consider
```math
\alpha(x,u) = \exp\left( \sum_i w_i(x) (x_i-y_i)+\frac{(x_i-y_i)
^2}{2\sigma_i^2}\right)
```
Which has Hessian matrix
```math
\frac{\partial^2 f}{\partial y_i \partial y_j}(x,y) = -w_i(x)w_j(x) + w_j(x) x_i^3 - 2 x_i^3x_j^3 - \left(3 x_i^2 - \frac{1}{\sigma_i^2} \right) \delta_{ij}
```

This Hessian matrix can possess positive eigenvalues depending on the variance of the Gaussian components $`\sigma_i`$ and the coordinates in the phenotypic space.

## References
- [Evolutionary dynamics from deterministic microscopic ecological processes](https://journals.aps.org/pre/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevE.101.032411)

This paper proposes a new deterministic way of running an IBM. The nice thing about it is that it is still compatible with the canonical equation of adaptive dynamics, and runs faster than other models.
- [Individual-based models for adaptive diversification in high-dimensional phenotype spaces](https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jtbi.2015.10.009)

 This paper provides a method to construct individual-based models such that they faithfully reproduce the given adaptive dynamics attractor without diversification - cf the minimal competition kernel. It then shows that a propensity to diversify can be introduced by adding Gaussian competition terms that generate frequency dependence while still preserving the same adaptive dynamics. For sufficiently strong competition, the disruptive selection generated by frequency-dependence overcomes the directional evolution along the selection gradient and leads to diversification in phenotypic directions that are orthogonal to the selection gradient.
